README
================

  - [Title](#title)
  - [Abstract](#abstract)
  - [File descriptions](#file-descriptions)

# Title

Ecosystem size and complexity dictate riverine biodiversity

# Abstract

The species-area relationship, a tendency in which species richness
increases with increasing area, is a ubiquitous pattern in ecology1 and
has formed the basis of area-based conservation strategies2,3. However,
many ecosystems possess a complex spatial structure that cannot be
represented by area (the scale-invariant complexity)4,5, and its role in
scaling biodiversity is largely unknown. Here, we use theory and
empirical analysis of extensive fish community data to show that
ecosystem size and complexity jointly regulate biodiversity in rivers.
Rivers are a prime example of fractal branching networks where the
recurrent merging of diverse streams generates a pronounced
self-similarity in complex branching patterns4. Ecosystem complexity,
which we define as the probability of branching per unit river
distance6,7, should increase watershed-scale species richness by
increasing habitat heterogeneity. Meanwhile, ecosystem size should
dictate metacommunity size and total habitat diversity, two factors that
regulate watershed-scale species richness8,9. Metacommunity simulations
in branching networks predicted biodiversity patterns consistent with
our hypothesis. Larger and more branched ecosystems supported greater
species richness at the watershed scale, and the importance of spatial
difference in species composition was apparent when simulated species
dispersal is limited. Cross-watershed comparisons across two geographic
regions (the Hokkaido island in Japan and the midwestern US) provided
empirical support for the theoretical predictions. In both regions,
watershed-scale species richness increased with ecosystem size
(watershed area) and complexity (branching probability) through enhanced
spatial difference in species composition. Recognizing the dual control
of biodiversity should broaden viable options for spatial planning of
protected areas or restoration, thereby helping conserve biodiversity
from societal demands that threaten it.

# File descriptions

See `metadata.html`
